# Weather-and-Wildfires
An analysis on historical weather data and wildfire activity in Boulder County, Colorado

## Research Question: 
Is there a connection between the number of wildfires to the average temperature and precipitiation during that year’s summer/winter?

## Hypothesis: 
In years that there are more wildfires, the average summer temperatures will be hotter and the precipitation in Summer and Winter less due to the fact that fires thrive in hot and dry conditions along with how conditions in Summers can often dictate Winter patterns.

## Datasets and Background
The datasets found for use in this analysis include a few different ones from different places to gather the full picture related to the hypothesis and research question. Finding historical weather data matching up with the dates of the wildfire datasets is quite challenging as many have paywalls or, while being open-source, some datasets only allow for a certain amount of data requests at a time. Thankfully NOAA is very generous with providing their global and significant data collection to the public for free. The first dataset I will be using is provided by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) (https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cdo-web/search), who have an extensive weather dataset from weather stations all around the globe. This data I requested from NOAA [Global Summary of the Month Dataset (GSOM) - Documentation for GSOM and GSOY](https://www1.ncdc.noaa.gov/pub/data/cdo/documentation/gsom-gsoy_documentation.pdf) goes from January 1974 to October 2020 and includes all of the analytics from two weather stations in that time. Due to request limitations, its impossible to request every single weather station in Boulder (there are many), so I chose two weather stations that have historical data dating back to the start date I needed and continue up until today. Many weather stations were either installed after the date or were decomissioned at points. To get a reliable and consistent dataset, using weather from date A to B is important rather than relying on other sensors in different locations. The two weather stations I selected were from Boulder, CO US and Gross Reservoir, CO US. These were some of the first weather stations placed in Boulder County that are still functional today. Additionally, they are also placed in somewhat different climate conditions. Gross Reservoir is at a higher elevation, in the mountains/foothills, and near densely wooded areas whereas the Boulder station is located at the base of the foothills, at a lower elevation, and in the city (with homes and businesses, not dense forest). 

The second and third datasets are provided by Boulder County (https://opendatabouldercounty.hub.arcgis.com/search). One is a historical record of wildfires in the county containing the name, (sometimes) start date, end date, and the size/shape of the fire. Unfortunately, this dataset only includes wildfire data up until April 2017; more on this in the following paragraph. 

The other dataset from Boulder County is a CSV and shapefile of the location, name, address, city, district, etc. regarding fire stations dotted across the county. This will provide the ability to add fire station locations and give context to the question at hand. It appears that this file used to have the number of volunteers and paid firefighters working at each station but it looks like this may only be an internal metric that is not provided to the public. If I had access to this, it would be interesting to see how different fire stations are staffed depending on the proximity to the majority of wildfires in the county.

Finally, the last dataset I will be utilizing is the NASA VIIRS sattelite readings (https://firms2.modaps.eosdis.nasa.gov/download/). This satellite can look for areas with high temperatures (hotspots) across the globe which can give indication to where a wildfire might be. I manually selected the region using the following polygon below which is roughly the area of Boulder County. POLYGON((-105.67623 39.93125,-105.67349 40.01639,-105.63984 40.03493,-105.63023 40.1393,-105.66525 40.17089,-105.65014 40.25809,-105.05413 40.26221,-105.05001 39.99991,-105.05413 39.97657,-105.12692 39.95459,-105.14614 39.91408,-105.39677 39.91339,-105.4002 39.93331,-105.67623 39.93125))

These satellites are not 100% accurate but it will give some insight into dates and sizes of fires from 2017 up until very recently (as the Boulder county data only goes up until 2017).